Lourmarin is a small village of about 1000 inhabitants which is located at the foot of the Luberon. This is one of the most beautiful villages in France, and its inhabitants can say that their little piece of paradise in Provence is rich in history. Indeed, this village is a real open-air museum that makes us wander from era to era thanks to its many historical monuments or registered in the general inventory of cultural heritage of France and its unusual architecture.

Despite its tranquility (especially on winter), this village is also witnessed many cultural, gastronomic and musical events, and is becoming an important technology hub in southern Luberon with its new digital space of 3000 square meters (called the FRUITIERE NUMERIQUE). 
Lourmarin is a village where life is good and entertaining, thanks to its numerous quality restaurants and innumerable coffee bars where you can dance both on electronic music as rock'n'roll, drinking a glass of local wine in a friendly atmosphere.

It is also a good place to make shopping, due to the presence of numerous shops and art galleries, all more beautiful than each other. Between art, craft and modern trend, you have a wide choice of quality in terms of clothing, jewelry, decoration, souvenirs, groceries, artworks ...

Land of sun and relaxation, but also land of work, this village has seen the development of many activities over time, such as agriculture, cultivation of silkworms, basketry, candied cherries production, wine culture, olive growing, and many other activities that you will have the chance to discover throughout this ballad in the village of Lourmarin.

Speaking of wine, it is important to remember that certain wines from the Luberon (especially produced in Lourmarin and around) are protected by the label "AOC Luberon" which allows wine growers of the region to preserve their land while promoting its economic development in harmony with the Regional Natural Park of Luberon.
In the park, the vines enjoyed exceptional development conditions between diurnal sun and nocturnal freshness, the wines produced in the Luberon are balanced and varied, especially for varieties. The endemic varieties of the Rhone Valley include Syrah and Grenache that allow to assemble many red and rosé wines; but also Vermentino for white wines.
In 2012, the AOC Luberon had counted 52 private cellars, 10 cooperatives and one union of producers; the same year, 20 million bottles were produced on 3220 hectares of cultivated area: a wide choice for your future tastings! The region produces about 50% rosé, 30% red and the rest of white wine. Now it's up to you to choose your favorite color... !

Lourmarin is also a land which has received and is still receiving many personalities charmed by the atmosphere of this village, such as Albert Camus, Henri Bosco, Jean Grenier, Jules Roy, René Char, Philippe de Girard ... the General De Gaulle and the Queen Elizabeth (during official visits). 
Today the famous DJ Laurent Garnier, who owns a home nearby, alive each summer at the castle of Lourmarin, the Music festival called "YEAH!" which brings a large crowd coming from all over France and elsewhere!

This village has not always been as quiet as it is today; in the Middle Ages the path linking Aix en Provence to Apt and passing through Lourmarin (called "La Combe") was described as the most dangerous road in the south Luberon. Moreover, "la Combe de Lourmarin" was the stronghold of many passing vagabonds, who were hiding in caves to loot the passing carts (see "La grotte des Brigands" in la Combe)!

The foundations of Lourmarin date from the twelfth century (date of the first built fortress); at the time this village depended on Forcalquier County, and on the County of Provence in 1220. But it was not until the fifteenth century that Lourmarin was rebuilt by Foulques d'Agoult, on the remains of this old fortress.
At that time, a great wave of economic migration was underway and approximately 1,400 Vaudois down the Alps to settle in Lourmarin and in the surrounding areas. Lourmarin was then in a fief of 24 Vaudois villages including wetlands that made it a centerpiece for these communities.
Unfortunately, a fire was driven in 1545 by Paulin de la Garde, during the religious wars, and exterminated 3000 Vaudois and those 24 villages of the Vaucluse. 
It is therefore only at the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685 that large Dutch winegrowers will start to install here due to the richness of the lands, and that the village begin to prosper.

The Vaudois of the Luberon are people coming from the Luberon region belonging to the Waldensian Church (Vaudes Doctrins). The history of the Vaudois well illustrates the religious tensions that were shaking the Christians in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, particularly during the aforementioned massacre. 
Thus, Lourmarin has long oscillated between vaudois majority, Protestant majority and then Christian majority.

But how to speak of Lourmarin, without mentioning a piece of history of the Luberon mountain, overlooking the village and which is actually the true beauty of the village? The Luberon, Is a mountain extending between Alpes de Haute Provence and the Vaucluse that measures about 60 km long and 5 km wide.
A human population of the mountain flanks is attested from the Middle Paleolithic by deposits away from the Bridge de la Combette in Bonnieux and the safe of the Peyrards in Buoux ; wa can found in the Luberon many of burial caves and numerous archaeological sites attesting the presence of a Roman settlement in
the Antiquity.

If today the mountain seems to be traversed only by hunters or hikers, it provided for centuries significant resources to people living in the periphery (wood, coal, limestone for construction of buildings, animals...); its strategic location made it an important gateway during the medieval time and served as a refuge for many persecuted people : for example the Vaudois we just talk and the resistance fighters during World War II.

Since 1977, the Luberon is located in the middle of the Luberon Regional Park and is preserved from industrialization to the delight of the inhabitants of hilltop villages.


The team from LA FRUITIERE NUMERIQUE and the Toursim Office therefore wish you beautiful moments in this emblematic village in the south Luberon and thank you for spending time here and discovering Lourmarin.